RFC: add rfc doc for optimist conflict DDL (#4758)
pingcap/tiflow: dm/docs/RFCS/20220202_optimist_shard_mode_support_conflict_ddl.md

# Proposal: DM Optimist Shard Mode Support Conflict DDL

- Author(s):    [gmhdbjd](https://github.com/gmhdbjd)
- Last updated: 2022-03-03

## Background

> Current optimist shard mode do not support three types of DDLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Current optimist shard mode does not support three types of DDLs.
```

> Current optimist shard mode does not support three types of DDLs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Current optimistic shard mode does not support three types of DDLs.
```

we should also specify (or link to) what's the definition of comparable

> - DDLs that make a table "big and small", such as `alter table tb rename column a to b`, which in a sense is equivalent to deleting `a` and adding `b` to table `tb`, making the table "big and small".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- DDLs that make a table "bigger and smaller", such as `alter table tb rename column a to b`, which in a sense is equivalent to delete `a` and add `b` to table `tb`.
```

> - DDLs that make the table incomparable, such as `alter table tb change a from int to varchar`, make it impossible to compare the size of `varchar` and `int`. For this kind of DDL, we can resolve it according to TiDB's fieldTypeMergeRules case by case, but we still need to consider a generic solution in order to be as compatible as possible with all DDLs. In a sense, this DDL also makes the table "big and small" (remove `a int`, add `a varchar`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- DDLs that make a column incomparable, such as `alter table tb change a from int to varchar`, making it impossible to compare the size of `varchar` and `int`. For this kind of DDL, we can resolve it according to TiDB's fieldTypeMergeRules case by case, but we still need to consider a generic solution in order to be as compatible as possible with all DDLs. In a sense, this DDL also makes the table "bigger and smaller" in column level (remove `a int`, add `a varchar`)
```

> - Adding NotNULL NoDefault columns, such as `alter table tb add column a not null`, which also makes the table incomparable (INT NOT NULL No Default vs Nil). In a sense, this DDL also makes the table "big and small" (remove nil, add `a int not null`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Adding NotNULL NoDefault columns, such as `alter table tb add column a not null`, which also makes the table incomparable (INT NOT NULL No Default vs Nil). In a sense, this DDL also makes the table "bigger and smaller" in column level (remove nil, add `a int not null`)
```

Why can't we merge case 2 &3 to case 1? They are all makes the table "bigger and smaller". Does case 1 are compared at multiple column level?

Author: This is to illustrate that all three DDLs are bigger and smaller, which is why they are split up

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

to simplify the proof at the end of this RFC, we treat every cases as making table "bigger and smaller".

```

## Design

### Compare DDLs based on whether they are identical or not

> A simple solution is to simply compare whether the DDLs are the same, just as we do for pessimistic DDL coordination. Coordination is completed when all sharding tables encounter the same conflicting DDL. This approach has the following problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simple solution is to simply check whether the DDLs are the same, just as what we do for pessimistic DDL coordination. Coordination is completed when all sharding tables encounter the same conflicting DDL. This approach has the following problems.
```

> - If the sharding DDLs are not identical (e.g., different comment information), then the coordination will fail

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the sharding DDLs are not identical (e.g. different comment information), then the coordination will fail
```

- As with pessimistic reconciliation, there may be problems with failover cases

>   - DDL1, DDL2 are executed on split tables 1 and 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - DDL1, DDL2 are executed on split table 1 and 2
```

  - master coordination of DDL1 is complete

>   - worker1 executes DDL1 successfully, then try to coordinate DDL2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - worker1 executes DDL1 successfully, then tries to coordinate DDL2
```

>   - worker2 crashes while executing DDL1 (DDL and checkpoint are not atomic), restart and recoordinate DDL1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - worker2 crashes while executing DDL1 (DDL and checkpoint are not atomic), restarts and recoordinates DDL1
```

  - master receives DDL2 from worker1, DDL1 from worker2, an error will be reported

> - Since our optimistic coordination allows inconsistent initial table structures, we also encounter the following problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Since our optimistic coordination allows inconsistent initial table structures, we also encounter the following problems.
```

Just to be clear, for a conflicting DDL that makes the table structure "big and small", suppose it makes table "-a, +b". When all the sharding tables have no `a` and have `b` at some point, then the DML synchronization of that sharding table can continue. e.g.

- If `rename column a to b`, when all sharding tables `rename column a to b`, then there is no conflict
- If `change a int to varchar`, when all sharding tables `change a int to varchar`, then there is no conflict
- If `add a int not null`, when all sharding tables `add a int not null`, then there is no conflict
- If table 1 `rename column a to b`, table 2 `drop column a, add column b`, then the downstream table structure has no `a`, has `b`, all the sharding tables can continue to synchronize DML, ***but the upstream and downstream data may be inconsistent***
- If table 1 `change a int to varchar`, table 2 `drop column a, add column a varchar`, then all tables can continue to synchronize DML, ***but the upstream and downstream data may be inconsistent***
- If table 1 `add a int not null`, `table 2 add a int not null default 0`, then all sharding tables can continue to synchronize DML.

> ***For the above possible data inconsistency, similar to the user did a truncate operation on a column of a sharding table, unless the user redo the task, the upstream and downstream data must be inconsistent, and there is no way to avoid this situation.***

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
***For the above possible data inconsistency problems, it's similar to the user did a truncate SQL on a column of a sharding table. Unless the user redo the task, the upstream and downstream data will always be inconsistent, and there is no way to avoid this situation currently.***
```

#### Definitions

> To determine whether the sharding tables consistent, the following operations and variables are defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To determine whether the sharding tables are consistent, the following operations and variables are defined.
```

> To determine whether the sharding tables are consistent, the following operations and variables are defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To determine whether the sharding tables are consistent, the following operations and variables are defined.

We use notation tb(a) to represent a table `tb` with column `a`. When the column properties matters, we also write them explictly.
```

#### Operations

> These two operations are currently implemented by Optimist Shard Mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These two operations are currently implemented by Optimistic Shard Mode.
```

> - Join(tb1,tb2,... ,tbN): the join operation, such as 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Join(tb1,tb2,... ,tbN): the join operation, returns the joined table structure that is "bigger" than each input or error, such as 
```

  - Join(tb1(a,b), tb2(a,c)) = tb(a,b,c)
  - Join(tb1(a int), tb2(a bigint)) = tb(a bigint)
  - Join(tb1(a int), tb2(a varchar)): Error
- Compare(tb1,tb2): compare operations, such as 
  - Compare(tb1(a,b), tb2(a,b,c)) = -1
  - Compare(tb1(a,b), tb2(a,b)) = 0
  - Compare(tb1(a bigint), tb2(a int)) = 1
  - Compare(tb1(a int), tb2(a varchar)): Error
  - Compare(tb1(a,b), tb2(a,c)): Error
  - Compare(tb1(a int, b int not null), tb2(a int)): Error

#### Variables

> - prev_table: the table structure before a conflicting DDL is executed for a sharding table, or after being executed if the DDL is not conflicting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- prev_table: the table structure of a sharding table before executed for a conflicting DDL, or after executed for a not conflicting DDL.
```

not very tidy about this two cases

- post_table: the table structure of a sharding table after a conflicting DDL is executed
- prev_tables: the set of prev_table of all sharding tables
- post_tables: the set of post_tables for all sharding tables that received conflicting DDLs (if a sharding table did not receive a conflicting DDL, then that sharding table will not be included in the post_tables)

> - final_tables: post_tables + {all table in prev_tables but not in post_tables}, that is: prev_table if a sharding table does not receive conflicting DDLs, and post_table if it receives conflicting DDLs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- final_tables: post_tables + {all table in prev_tables but not in post_tables}, that is the set of all table structures assuming all DDLs are executed.
```

> - joined: Join(final_tables), i.e. the set of all final_tables, i.e. the downstream joined table structure

Reviewer 2: why it has two "i.e."?

#### Algorithm

> We implement the final coordination algorithm according to the above definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We implement the coordination algorithm according to the above definition.
```

##### Initialization

```golang
// At the beginning, prev_tables is equal to the table structure of all sharding tables in the checkpoint
prev_tables = {prev_tb1, prev_tb2,... ,prev_tbN}
post_tables = {}
final_tables = {prev_tb1, prev_tb2,... ,prev_tbN} = prev_tables
```

##### Maintenance

> When master receives a DDL for sharding table `X`, `compare(prev_tbx,post_tbx)` to find out if the DDL is a conflicting DDL, e.g. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When master receives a DDL for sharding table `tbx`, `compare(prev_tbx,post_tbx)` to find out if the DDL is a conflicting DDL, e.g. 
```

- alter table add column new_col1, Compare(prev_tbx,post_tbx) = 1
- alter table rename a to b, Compare(prev_tbx,post_tbx) = error
- alter table change a from int to varchar, Compare(prev_tbx,post_tbx) = error
- alter table add column a int not null, Compare(prev_tbx,post_tbx) = error

If the DDL is not a conflicting DDL, just update the `tbx` in `prev_tables` and coordinate it normally.  
If the DDL is a conflicting DDL, add `post_tbx` to `post_tables`, update `final_tables`, i.e.

```golang

> // Receive conflict DDL for sharding table X, get prev_tbx, post_tbx

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Receive conflict DDL for sharding table tbx, given prev_tbx, post_tbx
```

prev_tables = {prev_tb1,... ,prev_tbx,... ,prev_tbN}
post_tables = {post_tbx}
final_tables = {prev_tb1,... ,post_tbx,... ,prev_tbN}
```

##### Termination

> master will then receive conflicting DDLs for the different sharidng tables, keeping `post_tables` and `final_tables` updated.

Reviewer 2: this paragraph and examples below should be moved to Maintenance

```golang
// M <= N
prev_tables = {prev_tb1, prev_tb2,...,prev_tbN}
post_tables = {post_tb1,post_tb3,...,post_tbM}
final_tables = {post_tb1, prev_tb2, post_tb3,...,post_tbM,...,prev_tbN}
joined=Join(final_tables)
```

Coordination of all sharding tables is completed when the following condition is finally reached.

> - `joined ! = error`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `joined != error`
```

> - `Compare(joined,prev_tbx) == error` for any sharding table `X` in `post_tables`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `Compare(joined,prev_tbx) == error` for any sharding table `tbx` in `post_tables`
```

> - for any sharding table `X` in `post_tables`, for any sharding table `Y` in `final_tables`: `Compare(Join(prev_tbx,final_tabley),post_tbx) >= 0`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- for any sharding table `tbx` in `post_tables`, for any sharding table `tby` in `final_tables`: `Compare(Join(prev_tbx,final_tby),post_tbx) >= 0`
```

what if Join(prev_tbx,final_tby) is error?

##### Proof

> We just need to prove that the final state of Termination satisfies the goal we proposed earlier, i.e., for each conflicting DDL(-a,+b), Termination's final end condition satisfies: all sharding tables (final_tables) have no `a` but `b`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We just need to prove that the final state of Termination satisfies the goal we proposed in "Consistency condition for sharding tables" sectino earlier, i.e., for each conflicting DDL(-a,+b), Termination's final end condition satisfies: all sharding tables (final_tables) have no `a` but `b`
```

> Assume that sharding table `K` executes a DDL1 such that tbk(-a,+b), i.e., *a ∈ prev_tbk*, *b ∉ prev_tbk*, *a ∉ post_tbk*, *b ∈ post_tbk*, and *post_tbk = prev_tbk - {a} + {b}* ①

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume that sharding table `tbk` executes a DDL1 such that tbk(-a,+b), i.e., *a ∈ prev_tbk*, *b ∉ prev_tbk*, let *post_tbk = prev_tbk - {a} + {b}* ①
```

1. joined ! = error  

>     i.e. all the sharding tables (final_tables) have no conflicts, substituting *table=k* gives *(joined=Join(final_tables)=Join(final_tbk,...) =Join(post_tbk,...)*  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    it means all the sharding tables (final_tables) have no conflicts, substituting *table=k* gives *joined=Join(final_tables)=Join(final_tbk,...)=Join(post_tbk,...)*  
```

what about final_tbk = prev_tbk?

>     ⟶ *Compare(joined,post_tbk)=Compare(Join(post_tbk,...) ,post_tbk)>=0*  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ⟶ *Compare(joined,post_tbk)=Compare(Join(post_tbk,...),post_tbk)>=0*  
```

why we jump to "Compare(joined,post_tbk)"? Do you mean "considering calculating the bool Compare(joined,post_tbk) != error, it equals to Compare(Join(post_tbk,...),post_tbk)>=0"?
